# T3A1.1 - Developer Workbook - Information Systems 

Research an organisation which has the details of its technology stack available online and a developer API for using its service / product 

https://stackshare.io
https://techstacks.io/stacks

Q1. Develop a data flow diagram which shows the flow of data in an organisation’s information system.

Q2. Develop an application architecture diagram which describes relationships between technologies and applications within an organisation’s information system.

Q3. Identify TWO products, services or priorities of an organisation and for each:

- explain how their application stack contributes to the delivery of the service or priority (2 marks)

- speculate why they chose the particular application or combination of applications (1 mark)


Netflix has 3 main components: 

1. OC or netflix CDN 

Netflix's custom global content delivery network (CDN) is called Open Connect. It is used to store Netflix video content in different locations around the world. 

A CDN is a system of distributed servers that delivers content to users based on the geographic location of the user. 

Transcoding is the process that converts a video file form one format to another to make videos viewable across different platforms and devices. Netflix creates approximately 1,200 files for every movie.


Transcode > CDN > 

AWS 

Data from: searchs, viewing, location, device, reviews -> Hadoop & Machine learning models to recommend new movies wihch you might like. 

Netflix Likes ReactJS: startup speed, runtime performance and modularity. 

Amazons Elastic Load Balancer service to route traffice to front-end services. 

2. Backend- 
3. Client - The user interface 


Databsae: EC2 deployed MySQL for billing/user info use 
Loss of a single node is guaranteed to have no data loss. 
Read replica set up in local as well as cross region

Cassandra - free and open-source distributed wide column store NoSQL database. - designed to handle large amounrd of data across many commodity serves providing high avalible with no single point of failure. 

Data is divided into two types: 

Live viewing history (LiveVH): Small number of recent records with frequent updates, uncompressed 

Comprssed Viewing HIsotry (CompressedVH): Large number of older viewing records with rate updates- compressed to reduce storage footprint. 


Kafka to chukwa for distrbute system monitoring: Push netflix ents to prcessing pipelines.

Netflix process ~500 billion events and ~1.3 PB per day. 
8 million events and 24 GB per second during peak hours. 
- Video viewing activities
- UI actives
- error logs
- Performance events
- Troubleshooting & diagnostic events 

Apache Chukwa toolkit for displaying monitoring and analysing results to make the best use of collected data.

The kafka routing service is responsible for moving data from fronting kafka to various sinks, s3, elasticsearch and 2nd kafka. 

Routing is done using apache samza. 

AWS application auto scaling - TITUS. Container management platform that provides scalable and reliable container execution and cloud-native integraion with Amazon AWS.

Used to power netflix streaming, recommendations, and content systems. Titus will scale instances and also dockers based on the traffic conditions. 


Media processing: 

Validating the video > Media Pipeline > Archer, mapredcue style platform, 


SPARK - content reccomendations and personalization, machine learning pipelines. 

